capacity-mode-evaluator/README.md, before:

# Table Capacity Mode Optimization Tool

The Table Capacity Mode Optimization Tool analyzes DynamoDB table usage (metrics), simulate autoscaling behavior based on the specified parameters and generate analysis summary for optimizing capacity mode and provisioning.

### Features

- Retrieves DynamoDB table information and autoscaling settings
- Retrieves the following metrcis from CloudWatch:
  - ProvisionedReadCapacityUnits (1 hour period)
  - ProvisionedWriteCapacityUnits (1 hour period)
  - ConsumedReadCapacityUnits (1 minute period)
  - ConsumedWriteCapacityUnits (1 minute period)
- Estimates Provisioned Capacity units by simulating autoscaling behavior based on the above metrcis and the specified read/write utilization targets and minimum/maximum units parameters.
- Generates a capacity mode analysis based on specified parameters.

**Scaling simulation behavior:**

- **Scale-out**: When consumed reads or writes exceeds the target utilization for two consecutive data points(two minutes).
- **Scale-in**: When consumed reads or writes falls %20 below the target utilization for 15 consecutive data points(15 minutes). It performs scale-in up to four times as needed, after which it scales in once every 1-hour windows within a day. This is to simulate the DynamoDB's scale-in limitation.

**Limitations:**

- The analysis generated by the tool are based on the above metrics for the number of days specified by `--number-of-days-look-back`. Due to CloudWatch metrics with a period of 60 seconds (1 minute) are available up to 14 days.
- The tool can not consider the scaling delays (the time it takes for the DynamoDB Autoscaling service to perform a scaling operation) when simulating the autoscaling behavior. Refer to AWS DynamoDB Autoscaling [docs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/amazondynamodb/latest/developerguide/AutoScaling.html) for further information and how it works.

Be aware that changing the capacity mode can have an impact on the applications, so be sure to test any changes thoroughly before making them in production.

## Choosing Capacity Mode in DynamoDB

DynamoDB capacity modes determine how your tables will scale to handle varying levels of read and write traffic. It's important to understand the cost implications of each mode to make informed decisions about which mode to use.

There are two capacity modes available in DynamoDB:

- [**On-Demand Mode:**](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/amazondynamodb/latest/developerguide/HowItWorks.ReadWriteCapacityMode.html#HowItWorks.OnDemand) Amazon DynamoDB on-demand mode is a serverless throughput option that simplifies database management and automatically scales to support customers' most demanding applications. DynamoDB on-demand enables you to create a table without worrying about capacity planning, monitoring usage, and configuring scaling policies. DynamoDB on-demand offers pay-per-request pricing for read and write requests so that you only pay for what you use. For on-demand mode tables, you don't need to specify how much read and write throughput you expect your application to perform.

On-demand mode is the default and recommended throughput option for most DynamoDB workloads. DynamoDB handles all aspects of throughput management and scaling to support workloads that can start small and scale to millions of requests per second.

- [**Provisioned Mode:**](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/amazondynamodb/latest/developerguide/HowItWorks.ReadWriteCapacityMode.html#HowItWorks.ProvisionedThroughput.Manual) In provisioned mode, you must specify the number of reads and writes per second that you require for your application. You'll be charged based on the hourly read and write capacity you have provisioned, not how much of that provisioned capacity you actually consumed. This helps you govern your DynamoDB use to stay at or below a defined request rate in order to obtain cost predictability.

### When to select which capacity mode?

For more information on when to select on-demand or provisioned capacity modes it is recommended to read the section [Evaluate your DynamoDB table's capacity mode](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/amazondynamodb/latest/developerguide/CostOptimization_TableCapacityMode.html), from the DynamoDB's developer guide.

## Requirements

- Python 3.10 or 3.11
- AWS CLI configured with appropriate credentials and region
- Required Python packages listed in `requirements.txt

## Installation

1. Clone the repository
2. Create Python Virtual Environment for clean install

   ```sh
   python3 -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate
   ```

3. Install the required Python packages:

   ```sh
   pip3 install -r requirements.txt
   ```

## Usage

1. Set up the AWS CLI with appropriate credentials and region if you haven't done so already.
2. Run the `capacity_reco.py` script:

   The following parameters are required to run the script:

   - `--dynamodb-tablename`: DynamoDB table name (optional; if not provided, the script will process all tables in the specified region)
   - `--dynamodb-read-utilization`: DynamoDB read utilization percentage (default: 70)
   - `--dynamodb-write-utilization`: DynamoDB write utilization percentage (default: 70)
   - `--dynamodb-minimum-write-unit`: DynamoDB minimum write unit (default: 1)
   - `--dynamodb-maximum-write-unit`: DynamoDB maximum write unit (default: 80000)
   - `--dynamodb-minimum-read-unit`: DynamoDB minimum read unit (default: 1)
   - `--dynamodb-maximum-read-unit`: DynamoDB maximum read unit (default: 80000)
   - `--number-of-days-look-back`: Number(1-14) of days to look back for CloudWatch metrics (default: 14)
   - `--max-concurrent-tasks`: Maximum number of tasks to run concurrently (default: 5)

- with default values:

  ```sh
  python3 capacity_reco.py
  ```

- with the desired values:

  ```sh
  python3 capacity_reco.py --dynamodb-tablename <table_name> --dynamodb-read-utilization <read_utilization> --dynamodb-write-utilization <write_utilization> --dynamodb-minimum-write-unit <minimum_write_unit> --dynamodb-maximum-write-unit <maximum_write_unit> --dynamodb-minimum-read-unit <minimum_read_unit> --dynamodb-maximum-read-unit <maximum_read_unit> --number-of-days-look-back <number_of_days_look_back> --max-concurrent-tasks <max_concurrent_tasks> [--debug]
  ```

  Add the `--debug` flag to save metrics and estimates as CSV files in the `output` folder.

3. The output files will be saved in the `output` folder.

## Output

Check the generated files in the `output` folder. [Here](static/analysis_summary.csv) is an example output

**Note:** The analysis generated is applicable only to the period specified by `--number-of-days-look-back` and is provided on separate lines for the table and relevant index for both `ReadCapacityUnits` and `WriteCapacityUnits`.

The **`analysis_summary.csv`** file contains the following columns,

- `index_name`: The name of the index associated table in the analysis.
- `base_table_name`: The name of the table associated with the analysis.
- `class`: Storage class of the table associated with the analysis.
- `metric_name`: The name of the metric associated with the analysis.
- `est_provisioned_cost`: The estimated cost of the Provisioned mode based on the table's simulated usage.
- `current_provisioned_cost`: If table capacity mode is provisioned, the table's current Provisioned cost.
- `ondemand_cost`: The cost of using on-demand mode for the table.
- `recommended_mode`: The recommended capacity mode for the table.
- `current_mode`: The table's current capacity mode.
- `status`: The status of the table or index if `Optimized` or `Not Optimized` based on the analysis.
- `savings_pct`: The estimated percentage of cost savings considering the recommended capacity mode.
- `number_of_days`: The number of days in the lookback period for the analysis.
- `current_min_capacity`: If table capacity mode is provisioned and autoscaling is enabled, the table's current minimum capacity units.
- `simulated_min_capacity`: The minimum capacity units based on what the provisioned capacity mode is simulated.
- `current_max_capacity`: If table capacity mode is provisioned and autoscaling is enabled, the table's current maximum capacity units.
- `simulated_max_capacity`: The maximum capacity units based on what the provisioned capacity mode is simulated.
- `current_target_utilization`: If table capacity mode is provisioned and autoscaling is enabled, the table's current target utilization.
- `simulated_target_utilization`: The target utilization based on what the provisioned capacity mode is simulated.
- `current_cost`: The table's current cost for period analyzed.
- `recommended_cost`: The table's estimated cost for period analyzed considering the recommended capacity mode.
- `autoscaling_enabled`: The Table's current Autoscaling Status.
- `Note`: The analysis provided in this script compares your table consumption and simulates cost using different parameters. This tool does not have access to your contextual information, business requirements or organization best practices. When changing your capacity mode from on-demand to provisioned based on the results, remember there were some assumptions made: The analysis window is 14 days and auto-scaling responds instantaneously. (In reality, Auto scaling service might take 4 mins to provision new table capacity depending on your increase conditions).

Commit message:

Adding a web based GUI for easy visualization

capacity-mode-evaluator/README.md, after:

# Table Capacity Mode Optimization Tool

The Table Capacity Mode Optimization Tool analyzes DynamoDB table usage (metrics), simulate autoscaling behavior based on the specified parameters and generate analysis summary for optimizing capacity mode and provisioning.

### Features

- Retrieves DynamoDB table information and autoscaling settings
- Retrieves the following metrcis from CloudWatch:
  - ProvisionedReadCapacityUnits (1 hour period)
  - ProvisionedWriteCapacityUnits (1 hour period)
  - ConsumedReadCapacityUnits (1 minute period)
  - ConsumedWriteCapacityUnits (1 minute period)
- Estimates Provisioned Capacity units by simulating autoscaling behavior based on the above metrcis and the specified read/write utilization targets and minimum/maximum units parameters.
- Generates a capacity mode analysis based on specified parameters.

**Scaling simulation behavior:**

- **Scale-out**: When consumed reads or writes exceeds the target utilization for two consecutive data points(two minutes).
- **Scale-in**: When consumed reads or writes falls %20 below the target utilization for 15 consecutive data points(15 minutes). It performs scale-in up to four times as needed, after which it scales in once every 1-hour windows within a day. This is to simulate the DynamoDB's scale-in limitation.

**Limitations:**

- The analysis generated by the tool are based on the above metrics for the number of days specified by `--number-of-days-look-back`. Due to CloudWatch metrics with a period of 60 seconds (1 minute) are available up to 14 days.
- The tool can not consider the scaling delays (the time it takes for the DynamoDB Autoscaling service to perform a scaling operation) when simulating the autoscaling behavior. Refer to AWS DynamoDB Autoscaling [docs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/amazondynamodb/latest/developerguide/AutoScaling.html) for further information and how it works.

Be aware that changing the capacity mode can have an impact on the applications, so be sure to test any changes thoroughly before making them in production.

## Choosing Capacity Mode in DynamoDB

DynamoDB capacity modes determine how your tables will scale to handle varying levels of read and write traffic. It's important to understand the cost implications of each mode to make informed decisions about which mode to use.

There are two capacity modes available in DynamoDB:

- [**On-Demand Mode:**](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/amazondynamodb/latest/developerguide/HowItWorks.ReadWriteCapacityMode.html#HowItWorks.OnDemand) Amazon DynamoDB on-demand mode is a serverless throughput option that simplifies database management and automatically scales to support customers' most demanding applications. DynamoDB on-demand enables you to create a table without worrying about capacity planning, monitoring usage, and configuring scaling policies. DynamoDB on-demand offers pay-per-request pricing for read and write requests so that you only pay for what you use. For on-demand mode tables, you don't need to specify how much read and write throughput you expect your application to perform.

On-demand mode is the default and recommended throughput option for most DynamoDB workloads. DynamoDB handles all aspects of throughput management and scaling to support workloads that can start small and scale to millions of requests per second.

- [**Provisioned Mode:**](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/amazondynamodb/latest/developerguide/HowItWorks.ReadWriteCapacityMode.html#HowItWorks.ProvisionedThroughput.Manual) In provisioned mode, you must specify the number of reads and writes per second that you require for your application. You'll be charged based on the hourly read and write capacity you have provisioned, not how much of that provisioned capacity you actually consumed. This helps you govern your DynamoDB use to stay at or below a defined request rate in order to obtain cost predictability.

### When to select which capacity mode?

For more information on when to select on-demand or provisioned capacity modes it is recommended to read the section [Evaluate your DynamoDB table's capacity mode](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/amazondynamodb/latest/developerguide/CostOptimization_TableCapacityMode.html), from the DynamoDB's developer guide.

## Requirements

- Python 3.10 or 3.11
- AWS CLI configured with appropriate credentials and region
- Required Python packages listed in `requirements.txt

## Installation

1. Clone the repository
2. Create Python Virtual Environment for clean install

   ```sh
   python3 -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate
   ```

3. Install the required Python packages:

   ```sh
   pip3 install -r requirements.txt
   ```

## Usage

1. Set up the AWS CLI with appropriate credentials and region if you haven't done so already.
2. Run the `capacity_reco.py` script:

   The following parameters are required to run the script:

   - `--dynamodb-tablename`: DynamoDB table name (optional; if not provided, the script will process all tables in the specified region)
   - `--dynamodb-read-utilization`: DynamoDB read utilization percentage (default: 70)
   - `--dynamodb-write-utilization`: DynamoDB write utilization percentage (default: 70)
   - `--dynamodb-minimum-write-unit`: DynamoDB minimum write unit (default: 1)
   - `--dynamodb-maximum-write-unit`: DynamoDB maximum write unit (default: 80000)
   - `--dynamodb-minimum-read-unit`: DynamoDB minimum read unit (default: 1)
   - `--dynamodb-maximum-read-unit`: DynamoDB maximum read unit (default: 80000)
   - `--number-of-days-look-back`: Number(1-14) of days to look back for CloudWatch metrics (default: 14)
   - `--max-concurrent-tasks`: Maximum number of tasks to run concurrently (default: 5)
   - `--show-dashboard`: Display results in a GUI for simple visualization (default: True when specified)

- with default values:

  ```sh
  python3 capacity_reco.py
  ```

- with the desired values:

  ```sh
  python3 capacity_reco.py --dynamodb-tablename <table_name> --dynamodb-read-utilization <read_utilization> --dynamodb-write-utilization <write_utilization> --dynamodb-minimum-write-unit <minimum_write_unit> --dynamodb-maximum-write-unit <maximum_write_unit> --dynamodb-minimum-read-unit <minimum_read_unit> --dynamodb-maximum-read-unit <maximum_read_unit> --number-of-days-look-back <number_of_days_look_back> --max-concurrent-tasks <max_concurrent_tasks> --show-dashboard [--debug] 
  ```

  Add the `--debug` flag to save metrics and estimates as CSV files in the `output` folder.

3. The output files will be saved in the `output` folder.

## Output

Check the generated files in the `output` folder. [Here](static/analysis_summary.csv) is an example output

**Note:** The analysis generated is applicable only to the period specified by `--number-of-days-look-back` and is provided on separate lines for the table and relevant index for both `ReadCapacityUnits` and `WriteCapacityUnits`.

The **`analysis_summary.csv`** file contains the following columns,

- `index_name`: The name of the index associated table in the analysis.
- `base_table_name`: The name of the table associated with the analysis.
- `class`: Storage class of the table associated with the analysis.
- `metric_name`: The name of the metric associated with the analysis.
- `est_provisioned_cost`: The estimated cost of the Provisioned mode based on the table's simulated usage.
- `current_provisioned_cost`: If table capacity mode is provisioned, the table's current Provisioned cost.
- `ondemand_cost`: The cost of using on-demand mode for the table.
- `recommended_mode`: The recommended capacity mode for the table.
- `current_mode`: The table's current capacity mode.
- `status`: The status of the table or index if `Optimized` or `Not Optimized` based on the analysis.
- `savings_pct`: The estimated percentage of cost savings considering the recommended capacity mode.
- `number_of_days`: The number of days in the lookback period for the analysis.
- `current_min_capacity`: If table capacity mode is provisioned and autoscaling is enabled, the table's current minimum capacity units.
- `simulated_min_capacity`: The minimum capacity units based on what the provisioned capacity mode is simulated.
- `current_max_capacity`: If table capacity mode is provisioned and autoscaling is enabled, the table's current maximum capacity units.
- `simulated_max_capacity`: The maximum capacity units based on what the provisioned capacity mode is simulated.
- `current_target_utilization`: If table capacity mode is provisioned and autoscaling is enabled, the table's current target utilization.
- `simulated_target_utilization`: The target utilization based on what the provisioned capacity mode is simulated.
- `current_cost`: The table's current cost for period analyzed.
- `recommended_cost`: The table's estimated cost for period analyzed considering the recommended capacity mode.
- `autoscaling_enabled`: The Table's current Autoscaling Status.
- `Note`: The analysis provided in this script compares your table consumption and simulates cost using different parameters. This tool does not have access to your contextual information, business requirements or organization best practices. When changing your capacity mode from on-demand to provisioned based on the results, remember there were some assumptions made: The analysis window is 14 days and auto-scaling responds instantaneously. (In reality, Auto scaling service might take 4 mins to provision new table capacity depending on your increase conditions).

**GUI Visualization:** Use the `--show-dashboard` flag to interactively explore the data. Once processing is complete, a dashboard will present a summarized view of the results. To exit, press `Ctrl+C` in the terminal where the tool was launched.
